It is an absolute fallacy spread by climate change deniers that the green agenda will result in a dramatic fall in GDP and living standards. There is absolutely no doubt that humans consumption of pretty much everything will need to fall somewhat to avoid doing irreparable damage to the planet but the economic and environmental benefits of moving to greener technology are quite straightforward. The UK adopted the emerging technologies of the Industrial Revolution back in the 19th century as a change that was inevitable and would in the long run benefit the country. Private investors flocked to invest in new technologies- railways, engineering projects, communications etc and it resulted in an explosion of economic growth which over time raised living standards. The entire planet IS going to have to change to meet the demands of climate change, whether that is through renewable energies, cleaner aviation, reduction of synthetic clothing or food production to meet an ever growing population. The earlier that investment goes into this, either by private companies or by governments, the quicker you will benefit from the rewards as, just with the Industrial Revolution, the rest of the world will look to you for an understanding of how the technologies have been developed and used.  The UK has a wealth of scientific research and innovation capabilities as the vaccine development illustrated. The issue is that frequently while things can be invented and developed in Britain, there is not sufficient capital to upscale these technologies to be produced en masse. This is where government should be looking to intervene, both by direct investment into these technologies, and incentives for UK owned companies to invest in these as well. Instead of them being manufactured overseas, our labour force could be used instead, just as it once was, and it could be used to revitalise parts of our country which have been economically depressed since the closure of many heavy industries in the 1980s.  The green agenda and growth agenda need not be polar opposites. It just needs a government with a clear vision on how it can be done to maximise benefits for all.