4 day weeks for workers doesn't have to necessitate shutting down for the other 3 days. Most shops, for example, are open 6 or 7 days a week, but that doesn't mean every staff member is working 7 days a week. It means there are different shifts that are scheduled to make sure the shop has the right number of staff. So 4 day weeks will likely mean many businesses need to take on more employees. But those businesses will also be making more money because people with more time off spend more money.  People fall ill at "inconvenient times" already, namely Saturdays and Sundays, yet hospitals are (or should be, when the NHS is funded properly) open all the time precisely because of this, and that wouldn't change under a 4 day week. What would change is doctors, nurses, etc would be working fewer hours, making them less exhausted and less prone to stress, burnout, and mistakes. Obviously more would need to be employed to make sure hospitals keep an appropriate level of staff. That would be good for patient care as well. Education is a bit trickier, but I can't see why schools, colleges and universities couldn't have 5 day weeks, with more teachers. Certainly in secondary school, college, and university, students don't have just one teacher for the entire week anyway. I'm a mature student in full time education, and have 3 tutors throughout the week. None of my tutors work a 5 day week. I will concede that it may be more challenging for primary school students, where the continuity of having a single teacher all week may be important, but it may also be that more teachers working fewer hours will be good for students as well, for the same reason it would be good for patients in the healthcare service: well-rested teachers are better teachers than tired ones.  Its actually also likely that it will increase productivity for people who make things: tired people are less productive, so the things-per-hour won't necessarily stay the same. Well-rested employees are happier and healthier, so their thing-per-hour rate will likely go up. As this article pointed out, all these arguments were made during the shift from 6 to 5 day weeks, and yet productivity and outcomes improved with the reduction of working hours. It's not all about the number of hours worked. If it was, everyone would be required to work 12 hours a day, 7 days a week. But it's been well-established that productivity takes a nosedive when that happens, and when people are tired, mistakes are made. It's also not a given that a 5 day week is the optimal number of working hours for maximum productivity. That's assumed to be the case solely because it's common practice, but it hasn't been proven. The trials for 4 day weeks indicate that productivity is higher on a lower number of hours, and not just for desk jobs.