To modernise the building would be a health and saftey nightmare. On older buildings like that asbestos is a major danger and work is very time consuming and expensive and involves creating 'safe routes' for cabling of all types, even in roof spaces. This a particlar problem for where modern computer systems are required in a bulding.  To completely remove asbestos from is prohibitvely expensive and very disruptive and a major safety issue to anyone using the building. Which is one reason why a lot of companies relocate from older buildings instead of modernising the fabric of the building  And every time walls or roof space are worked on it needs health and safety report done on the risk from work being done and what protective steps are required. As well as being asbestos free, a more modern building will be more energy efficient, have any costinsg been done on c02 saved on having a modern well insulated building v c02 on heating etc. And on how much c02 used in any modernisation to the fabric of the building? The building previously had planning permission until Gove got involved. But if they do leave, any future owner is going to face same issues on health and safety re asbestos when building is updated, spilt into smaller retail units or even converted into housing. In Edinburgh the class A Jenners building is being modernised by the billionaire owner of ASOS and is being restored back to its orginal state, but with a modern interior and internal fabric of building being gutted and modernised. Anders Prosen also spends money on rewilding his large Scottish estate so renovating jenners is a personal and not so much a money making commercial project for him. He can afford to lose quite few millions on this as its more of a philanthropy project for him. There is no timescale on its completion, but it wil be a long project and very costly, but Anders Prosen has the money to do it. The question would be as a commercial business does M&S have the bottomless pockets of money and ability to have a major asset unused for far longer than a rebuild would be? And unlike Jenners M&S store is not a listed building. https://www.thejennersbuilding.com/